As dairyers became
more adept and harvested greater quantities
of milk, they found new ways to concentrate
and preserve its nourishment, and
developed distinctive dairy products in the
different climatic regions of the Old World.
In arid southwest Asia, goat and sheep
milk was lightly fermented into yogurt that
could be kept for several days, sun-dried,
or kept under oil; or curdled into cheese
that could be eaten fresh or preserved by
drying or brining. Lacking the settled life
that makes it possible to brew beer from
grain or wine from grapes, the nomadic
Tartars even fermented mare’s milk into
lightly alcoholic koumiss, which Marco
Polo described as having “the qualities and
flavor of white wine.” In the high country
of Mongolia and Tibet, cow, camel, and
yak milk was churned to butter for use as a
high-energy staple food.
In semitropical India, most zebu and
buffalo milk was allowed to sour overnight
into a yogurt, then churned to yield buttermilk
and butter, which when clarified
into ghee (p. 37) would keep for months.
Some milk was repeatedly boiled to keep it
sweet, and then preserved not with salt,
but by the combination of sugar and long,
dehydrating cooking (see box, p. 26).
The Mediterranean world of Greece and
Rome used economical olive oil rather than
butter, but esteemed cheese. The Roman
Pliny praised cheeses from distant provinces
that are now parts of France and Switzerland.
And indeed cheese making reached its
zenith in continental and northern Europe,
thanks to abundant pastureland ideal for
cattle, and a temperate climate that allowed
long, gradual fermentations.
The one major region of the Old World
not to embrace dairying was China, perhaps
because Chinese agriculture began
where the natural vegetation runs to often
toxic relatives of wormwood and epazote
rather than ruminant-friendly grasses. Even
so, frequent contact with central Asian
nomads introduced a variety of dairy products
to China, whose elite long enjoyed
yogurt, koumiss, butter, acid-set curds, and,
around 1300 and thanks to the Mongols,
even milk in their tea!
Dairying was unknown in the New
World. On his second voyage in 1493,
Columbus brought sheep, goats, and the
first of the Spanish longhorn cattle that
would proliferate in Mexico and Texas.
Milk in Europe and America:
From Farmhouse to Factory
Preindustrial Europe In Europe, dairying
took hold on land that supported abundant
pasturage but was less suited to the cultivation
of wheat and other grains: wet Dutch
lowlands, the heavy soils of western France
and its high, rocky central massif, the cool,
moist British Isles and Scandinavia, alpine
valleys in Switzerland and Austria. With
time, livestock were selected for the climate
and needs of different regions, and diversified
into hundreds of distinctive local breeds
(the rugged Brown Swiss cow for cheesemaking
in the mountains, the diminutive
Jersey and Guernsey for making butter in
the Channel Islands). Summer milk was preserved
in equally distinctive local cheeses. By
medieval times, fame had come to French
Roquefort and Brie, Swiss Appenzeller, and
Italian Parmesan. In the Renaissance, the
Low Countries were renowned for their
butter and exported their productive
Friesian cattle throughout Europe.
Until industrial times, dairying was
done on the farm, and in many countries
mainly by women, who milked the animals
in early morning and after noon and
then worked for hours to churn butter or
make cheese. Country people could enjoy
good fresh milk, but in the cities, with confined
cattle fed inadequately on spent
brewers’ grain, most people saw only
watered-down, adulterated, contaminated
milk hauled in open containers through
the streets. Tainted milk was a major cause
of child mortality in early Victorian times.
Industrial and Scientific Innovations
Beginning around 1830, industrialization
transformed European and American 
12 milk and dairy products
dairying. The railroads made it possible to
get fresh country milk to the cities, where
rising urban populations and incomes
fueled demand, and new laws regulated
milk quality. Steam-powered farm machinery
meant that cattle could be bred and
raised for milk production alone, not for a
compromise between milk and hauling, so
milk production boomed, and more than
ever was drunk fresh. With the invention
of machines for milking, cream separation,
and churning, dairying gradually moved
out the hands of milkmaids and off the
farms, which increasingly supplied milk to
factories for mass production of cream,
butter, and cheese.
From the end of the 19th century, chemical
and biological innovations have helped
make dairy products at once more hygienic,
more predictable, and more uniform. The
great French chemist Louis Pasteur inspired
two fundamental changes in dairy practice:
pasteurization, the pathogen-killing
heat treatment that bears his name; and
the use of standard, purified microbial cultures
to make cheeses and other fermented
foods. Most traditional cattle breeds have
been abandoned in favor of high-yielding
black-and-white Friesian (Holstein) cows,
which now account for 90% of all American
dairy cattle and 85% of British. The
cows are farmed in ever larger herds and
fed an optimized diet that seldom includes
fresh pasturage, so most modern milk lacks
the color, flavor, and seasonal variation of
preindustrial milk.
Dairy Products Today Today dairying is
split into several big businesses with nothing
of the dairymaid left about them. Butter
and cheese, once prized, delicate concentrates
of milk’s goodness, have become
inexpensive, mass-produced, uninspiring
commodities piling up in government warehouses.
Manufacturers now remove much
of what makes milk, cheese, ice cream, and
butter distinctive and pleasurable: they
remove milk fat, which suddenly became
undesirable when medical scientists found
that saturated milk fat tends to raise blood
cholesterol levels and can contribute to
heart disease. Happily the last few years
have brought a correction in the view of
saturated fat, a reaction to the juggernaut
of mass production, and a resurgent interest
in full-flavored dairy products crafted
on a small scale from traditional breeds
that graze seasonally on green pastures.
MILK AND HEALTH
Milk has long been synonymous with
wholesome, fundamental nutrition, and for
good reason: unlike most of our foods, it is
actually designed to be a food. As the sole
sustaining food of the calf at the beginning
of its life, it’s a rich source of many essenMilk
and
In their roots, both milk and dairy recall the physical effort it once took to obtain milk
and transform it by hand. Milk comes from an Indo-European root that meant both
“milk” and “to rub off,” the connection perhaps being the stroking necessary to
squeeze milk from the teat. In medieval times, dairy was originally meaning the
room in which the or woman servant, made milk into butter and cheese. Dey in
turn came from a root meaning “to knead bread” (lady shares this root)—perhaps a
squeeze buttermilk out of butter (p. 34) and sometimes the whey out of cheese.
Food Words: Dairy
dey-ery,
dey,
reflection not only of the servant’s several duties, but also of the kneading required to 
milk and health 13
tial body-building nutrients, particularly
protein, sugars and fat, vitamin A, the B
vitamins, and calcium.
Over the last few decades, however, the
idealized portrait of milk has become more
shaded. We’ve learned that the balance of
nutrients in cow’s milk doesn’t meet the
needs of human infants, that most adult
humans on the planet can’t digest the milk
sugar called lactose, that the best route to
calcium balance may not be massive milk
intake. These complications help remind
us that milk was designed to be a food for
the young and rapidly growing calf, not
for the young or mature human.
MILK NUTRIENTS
Nearly all milks contain the same battery
of nutrients, the relative proportions of
which vary greatly from species to species.
Generally, animals that grow rapidly are
fed with milk high in protein and minerals.
A calf doubles its weight at birth in 50
days, a human infant in 100; sure enough,
cow’s milk contains more than double the
protein and minerals of mother’s milk. Of
the major nutrients, ruminant milk is seriously
lacking only in iron and in vitamin
C. Thanks to the rumen microbes, which
convert the unsaturated fatty acids of grass
and grain into saturated fatty acids, the
milk fat of ruminant animals is the most
highly saturated of our common foods.
Only coconut oil beats it. Saturated fat
does raise blood cholesterol levels, and
high blood cholesterol is associated with
an increased risk of heart disease; but the
other foods in a balanced diet can compensate
for this disadvantage (p. 253).
The box below shows the nutrient contents
of both familiar and unfamiliar milks.
These figures are only a rough guide, as
the breakdown by breed indicates; there’s
also much variation from animal to animal,
and in a given animal’s milk as its lactation
period progresses.
its major components.
Milk Fat Protein Minerals
Human 1.1 0.2
Cow 3.7 4.8 87
Holstein/Friesian 3.6 3.4 4.9 0.7 87
Brown Swiss 3.6 0.7
Jersey 5.2 4.9 85
Zebu 4.7 4.9 86
Buffalo 6.9 5.1 83
5.8 0.8
Goat 3.4 0.8
Sheep 7.5 4.8 80
Camel 2.9 5.4 87
Reindeer 17 11 2.8 68
Horse 1.2 6.3 90
Fin whale 42 12 1.3 43
The Compositions of Various Milks
The figures in the following table are the percent of the milk’s weight accounted for by
Lactose Water
4.0 6.8 88
3.4 0.7
4.0 4.7 87
3.9 0.7
3.3 0.7
3.8 0.8
Yak 6.5 4.6 82
4.0 4.5 88
6.0 1.0
3.9 0.8
1.5
2.0 0.3
1.4  milk and dairy products
MILK IN INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD:
NUTRITION AND ALLERGIES
In the middle of the 20th century, when
nutrition was thought to be a simple matter
of protein, calories, vitamins, and minerals,
cow’s milk seemed a good substitute
for mother’s milk: more than half of all
six-month-olds in the United States drank
it. Now that figure is down to less than
10%. Physicians now recommend that
plain cow’s milk not be fed to children
younger than one year. One reason is that
it provides too much protein, and not
enough iron and highly unsaturated fats,
for the human infant’s needs. (Carefully
prepared formula milks are better approximations
of breast milk.) Another disadvantage
to the early use of cow’s milk is
that it can trigger an allergy. The infant’s
digestive system is not fully formed, and
can allow some food protein and protein
fragments to pass directly into the blood.
These foreign molecules then provoke a
defensive response from the immune system,
and that response is strengthened each
time the infant eats. Somewhere between
1% and 10% of American infants suffer
from an allergy to the abundant protein in
cow’s milk, whose symptoms may range
from mild discomfort to intestinal damage
to shock. Most children eventually grow
out of milk allergy.
MILK AFTER INFANCY:
DEALING WITH LACTOSE
In the animal world, humans are exceptional
for consuming milk of any kind after
they have started eating solid food. And
people who drink milk after infancy are
the exception within the human species.
The obstacle is the milk sugar lactose,
which can’t be absorbed and used by the
body as is: it must first be broken down into
its component sugars by digestive enzymes
in the small intestine. The lactose-digesting
enzyme, lactase, reaches its maximum levels
in the human intestinal lining shortly
after birth, and then slowly declines, with a
steady minimum level commencing at
between two and five years of age and continuing
through adulthood.
The logic of this trend is obvious: it’s a
waste of its resources for the body to produce
an enzyme when it’s no longer needed;
and once most mammals are weaned, they
never encounter lactose in their food again.
But if an adult without much lactase activity
does ingest a substantial amount of
milk, then the lactose passes through the
small intestine and reaches the large intestine,
where bacteria metabolize it, and in
the process produce carbon dioxide, hydrogen,
and methane: all discomforting gases.
Sugar also draws water from the intestinal
walls, and this causes a bloated feeling or
diarrhea.
Low lactase activity and its symptoms
are called lactose intolerance. It turns out
that adult lactose intolerance is the rule
rather than the exception: lactose-tolerant
adults are a distinct minority on the planet.
Several thousand years ago, peoples in
northern Europe and a few other regions
underwent a genetic change that allowed
them to produce lactase throughout life,
probably because milk was an exceptionally
important resource in colder climates.
About 98% of Scandinavians are lactosetolerant,
90% of French and Germans, but
only 40% of southern Europeans and
North Africans, and 30% of African Americans.

Coping with Lactose Intolerance Fortunately,
lactose intolerance is not the same
as milk intolerance. Lactase-less adults can
consume about a cup/250 ml of milk per
day without severe symptoms, and even
more of other dairy products. Cheese contains
little or no lactose (most of it is drawn
off in the whey, and what little remains in
the curd is fermented by bacteria and
molds). The bacteria in yogurt generate
lactose-digesting enzymes that remain
active in the human small intestine and
work for us there. And lactose-intolerant
milk fans can now buy the lactose-digesting
enzyme itself in liquid form (it’s manufac-
milk and health 
tured from a fungus, Aspergillus), and add
a few drops to any dairy product just before
they consume it.
NEW QUESTIONS ABOUT MILK
Milk has been especially valued for two
nutritional characteristics: its richness in calcium,
and both the quantity and quality of
its protein. Recent research has raised some
fascinating questions about each of these.
Perplexity about Calcium and Osteoporosis
Our bones are constructed from
two primary materials: proteins, which
form a kind of scaffolding, and calcium
phosphate, which acts as a hard, mineralized,
strengthening filler. Bone tissue is constantly
being deconstructed and rebuilt
throughout our adult lives, so healthy
bones require adequate protein and calcium
supplies from our diet. Many women
in industrialized countries lose so much
bone mass after menopause that they’re at
high risk for serious fractures. Dietary calcium
clearly helps prevent this potentially
dangerous loss, or osteoporosis. Milk and
dairy products are the major source of calcium
in dairying countries, and U.S. government
panels have recommended that
adults consume the equivalent of a quart
(liter) of milk daily to prevent osteoporosis.
This recommendation represents an
extraordinary concentration of a single
food, and an unnatural one—remember
that the ability to drink milk in adulthood,
and the habit of doing so, is an aberration
limited to people of northern European
descent. A quart of milk supplies two-thirds
of a day’s recommended protein, and would
displace from the diet other foods—
vegetables, fruits, grains, meats, and fish
—that provide their own important nutritional
benefits. And there clearly must be
other ways of maintaining healthy bones.
Other countries, including China and
Good bone health results from a proper balance between the two ongoing processes of
bone deconstruction and reconstruction. These processes depend not only on calcium
and other controlling signals; trace nutrients (including vitamin C, magnesium, potassium,
and zinc); and other as yet unidentified substances. There appear to be factors in
is essential for the efficient absorption of calcium from our foods, and also influences
our own skin, where ultraviolet light from the sun activates a precursor molecule.
The amount of calcium we have available for bone building is importantly affected
by how much we excrete in our urine. The more we lose, the more we have to take in
boost our calcium requirement. A high intake of salt is one, and another is a high
acidifies our urine, and pulls neutralizing calcium salts from bone.
The best insurance against osteoporosis appears to be frequent exercise of the
bones that we want to keep strong, and a well-rounded diet that is rich in vitamins and
minerals, moderate in salt and meat, and includes a variety of calcium-containing
foods. Milk is certainly a valuable one, but so are dried beans, nuts, corn tortillas and
tofu (both processed with calcium salts), and several greens—kale, collards, mustard
greens.
The Many Influences on Bone Health
levels in the body, but also on physical activity that stimulates bone-building; hormones
tea and in onions and parsley that slow bone deconstruction significantly. Vitamin D
bone building. It’s added to milk, and other sources include eggs, fish and shellfish, and
from our foods. Various aspects of modern eating increase calcium excretion and so
intake of animal protein, the metabolism of whose sulfur-containing amino acids  milk and dairy products
Japan, suffer much lower fracture rates
than the United States and milk-loving
Scandinavia, despite the fact that their people
drink little or no milk. So it seems prudent
to investigate the many other factors
that influence bone strength, especially
those that slow the deconstruction process
(see box, p. 15). The best answer is likely to
be not a single large white bullet, but the
familiar balanced diet and regular exercise.
Milk Proteins Become Something More
We used to think that one of the major
proteins in milk, casein (p. 19), was mainly
a nutritional reservoir of amino acids with
which the infant builds its own body. But
this protein now appears to be a complex,
subtle orchestrator of the infant’s metabolism.
When it’s digested, its long aminoacid
chains are first broken down into
smaller fragments, or peptides. It turns out
that many hormones and drugs are also
peptides, and a number of casein peptides
do affect the body in hormone-like ways.
One reduces breathing and heart rates,
another triggers insulin release into the
blood, and a third stimulates the scavenging
activity of white blood cells. Do the peptides
from cow’s milk affect the metabolism
of human children or adults in significant
ways? We don’t yet know.
MILK BIOLOGY
AND CHEMISTRY
HOW THE COW MAKES MILK
Milk is food for the newborn, and so dairy
animals must give birth before they will
produce significant quantities of milk. The
mammary glands are activated by changes
in the balance of hormones toward the end
of pregnancy, and are stimulated to continue
secreting milk by regular removal of
milk from the gland. The optimum
sequence for milk production is to breed
the cow again 90 days after it calves, milk
it for 10 months, and let it go dry for the
two months before the next calving. In
intensive operations, cows aren’t allowed to
waste energy on grazing in variable pastures;
they’re given hay or silage (whole
corn or other plants, partly dried and then
preserved by fermentation in airtight silos)
in confined lots, and are milked only during
their two or three most productive years.
The combination of breeding and optimal
feed formulation has led to per-animal
yields of a hundred pounds or 15 gallons/58
liters per day, though the American average
is about half that. Dairy breeds of sheep
and goats give about one gallon per day.
The first fluid secreted by the mammary
gland is colostrum, a creamy, yellow solution
of concentrated fat, vitamins, and proteins,
especially immunoglobulins and
antibodies. After a few days, when the
colostrum flow has ceased and the milk is
saleable, the calf is put on a diet of reconstituted
and soy milks, and the cow is
milked two or three times daily to keep
the secretory cells working at full capacity.
The Milk Factory The mammary gland
is an astonishing biological factory, with
many different cells and structures working
together to create, store, and dispense milk.
Some components of milk come directly
from the cow’s blood and collect in the
udder. The principal nutrients, however—
fats, sugar, and proteins—are assembled
by the gland’s secretory cells, and then
released into the udder.
A Living Fluid Milk’s blank appearance
belies its tremendous complexity and vitality.
It’s alive in the sense that, fresh from the
udder, it contains living white blood cells,
some mammary-gland cells, and various
bacteria; and it teems with active enzymes,
some floating free, some embedded in the
membranes of the fat globules. Pasteurization
(p. 22) greatly reduces this vitality; in
fact residual enzyme activity is taken as a
sign that the heat treatment was insuffi-
cient. Pasteurized milk contains very few
living cells or active enzyme molecules, so it
is more predictably free of bacteria that
could cause food poisoning, and more sta-
milk biology and chemistry 
fat globules
casein proteins
ble; it develops off-flavors more slowly than
raw milk. But the dynamism of raw milk is
prized in traditional cheese making, where
it contributes to the ripening process and
deepens flavor.
Milk owes its milky opalescence to
microscopic fat globules and protein bundles,
which are just large enough to deflect
light rays as they pass through the liquid.
Dissolved salts and milk sugar, vitamins,
other proteins, and traces of many other
compounds also swim in the water that
accounts for the bulk of the fluid. The
sugar, fat, and proteins are by far the most
important components, and we’ll look at
them in detail in a moment.
First a few words about the remaining
components. Milk is slightly acidic, with a
pH between 6.5 and 6.7, and both acidity
and salt concentrations strongly affect the
behavior of the proteins, as we’ll see. The
fat globules carry colorless vitamin A and
its yellow-orange precursors the carotenes,
which are found in green feed and give
milk and undyed butter whatever color
they have. Breeds differ in the amount of
carotene they convert into vitamin A;
Guernsey and Jersey cows convert little
and give especially golden milk, while at
the other extreme sheep, goats, and water
buffalo process nearly all of their carotene,
The making of milk. Cells in
the cow’s mammary gland
synthesize the components of
milk, including proteins and
globules of milk fat, and
release them into many thousands
of small compartments
that drain toward the teat.
The fat globules pass through
the cells’ outer membranes,
and carry parts of the cell
membrane on their surface.
so their milk and butter are nutritious but
white. Riboflavin, which has a greenish
color, can sometimes be seen in skim milk
or in the watery translucent whey that
drains from the curdled proteins of yogurt